Becoming a 10x engineer - why user interviews are key (#5331)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/10x-engineers-do-user-interviews.md

---
date: 2023-02-19
title: Becoming a 10x engineer - why user interviews are key
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
  - luke-harries
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
  - Guides
  - Product engineers
---

> When it comes to becoming a 10x engineer, most people think about writing more code, buying more monitors, or using the latest framework where everything is a macro. But, in reality, leverage comes from choosing the right problem, building the right solution, and using the right tools. This can only happen when you have a deep understanding of your users. It's the only way to build something that people want.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most people think becoming a "10x engineer" is about writing more code, buying more monitors, or using the latest framework where everything is a macro. They're wrong. 

In my view, real leverage comes from choosing the right problem, building the right solution, and using the right tools. Or, to put it another way, optimising for velocity over speed.
```

> When it comes to becoming a 10x engineer, most people think about writing more code, buying more monitors, or using the latest framework where everything is a macro. But, in reality, leverage comes from choosing the right problem, building the right solution, and using the right tools. This can only happen when you have a deep understanding of your users. It's the only way to build something that people want.

Author: ```suggestion
When it comes to becoming a 10x engineer, most people think about improving their typing speed, buying more monitors, or using the latest framework where everything is a macro. But, in reality, leverage comes from choosing the right problem, building the right solution, and using the right tools. This can only happen when you have a deep understanding of your users. It's the only way to build something that people want.
```

> 
> ## Velocity vs. Speed
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```jsx
Speed = how quickly you can go from an idea to a rolled-out implementation.

Velocity = how quickly and how large an impact you can have on your users.
```

> It's easy to fall into the trap of optimizing only for speed. But you might rush to implement a feature only to find no one uses it. That's why it's crucial to speak directly with your users. By understanding their pain points and needs, you can design solutions that are intuitive and effective, addressing their "hair-on-fire" problems. Moving quickly is important, but it's even more important to move quickly in the right direction.

Reviewer: I feel like the "velocity vs speed" section bit here is a bit of a distraction and the "this article is about talking to users" gets a bit lost as result. Imo, it would be best write it as a two paragraph intro where the 1st para covers why optimising for speed is bad, and the 2nd para covers why 'talking to users' is the answer and what the reader will get out of this article – i.e. advise on how to talk to users as an engineer.

Author: Good point, will do!

## Reducing Information Bottlenecks: Why direct user-Engineer Interaction is Key

![PM to engineer](../images/blog/10x-engineers-do-user-interviews/pm-to-engineer.png)

![Direct user-Engineer Interaction](../images/blog/10x-engineers-do-user-interviews/direct-interaction.png)

Traditionally, information flows from the user to the product manager (PM) by an interview and then from the PM to the engineer through a bunch of tickets. At each stage, important context is lost. It’s one way, so you can’t go deeper on the important areas.

Direct two-way interaction significantly increases the signal, enabling you to quickly cut scope, realize you’re tackling the wrong problem, or come up with a more elegant solution. PM interviews are still useful to highlight important problem areas and bring in additional context. But they are not a replacement. 

> Compliment your sync interviews with async platforms like Slack for B2B or Whatsapp for B2C particularly for the solution validation phase.

Author: Will do :)

Thanks! I used: https://excalidraw.com/

> Compliment your sync interviews with async platforms like Slack for B2B or Whatsapp for B2C particularly for the solution validation phase.

Reviewer: That's great. I was like... "there's no way his writing is that neat on an iPad!"

- Is this actually a problem for you?

**Recommendation:** Read "The Mom Test" by Rob Fitzpatrick. It's a fantastic primer on problem exploration.

### 2. Solution validation 

You’ve identified the hair-on-fire problem and understand it well. Now you’re validating whether your solution actually solves it. Focus on presenting the user with quick prototypes.

Example activities:
 - Have the user click through a Figma prototype and think out-loud. Ask them to complete the high-level goal and see where they get stuck. Ask what they think the text means.

- Send a few mockups of the solutions over Slack to the user from the problem exploration interview and ask if it solves the problem.

- Create a mock-up and see if the user will commit to paying some amount if you build it

**Recommendation:** The book "Don’t make me think" is great for usability testing.

## Beware solution ideas from users, reframe them as problems

During interviews, users will often suggest an idea for the solution of what they want. It’s crucial to not accept this at face value and instead ask “Why?” until you can reframe it as a problem with the appropriate context. 

> Often the solution they propose doesn’t actually solve the problem they experienced, or there’s a much better solution that you can build instead. But most times it's not even a problem they are facing at all! Treat the solution idea as an ember and get curious about it.

Reviewer: This is a great point. Are there any more common pitfalls worth covering? I think they'd add a lot of value.

Author: Will have a think and add some more

---
date: 2023-02-19
title: Becoming a 10x engineer - why user interviews are key
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
  - luke-harries
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
  - Guides
  - Product engineers
---

> To become a 10x engineer, most people think about improving their typing speed, buying more monitors, or using the latest framework where everything is a macro. These hacks focus on speeding up the time from an idea to a rolled-out implementation. You'll get a 1.5x boost at most.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most people think becoming a 10x engineer means improving their typing speed, buying more monitors, or using the latest framework where everything is a macro. These hacks might speed up the time from an idea to a rolled-out implementation, but you'll get a 1.5x boost at most.
```

![Custom Prefix](../images/blog/10x-engineers-do-user-interviews/custom-prefix.png)

### Solving the information bottleneck: direct user-engineering interaction

![PM to engineer](../images/blog/10x-engineers-do-user-interviews/pm-to-engineer.png)

![Direct user-Engineer Interaction](../images/blog/10x-engineers-do-user-interviews/direct-interaction.png)

Traditionally, information flows from the user to the product manager (PM) by an interview and then from the PM to the engineer through a bunch of tickets. At each stage, important context is lost. It’s one way, so you can’t go deeper on the important areas.

Direct two-way interaction gives you this context. By significantly increasing the signal you can quickly cut scope, realize you’re tackling the wrong problem, or come up with a more elegant solution.

> And it's the engineers who can most effectively cut scope and reframe solutions, as they have the background on the existing architecture and components. PM interviews are still useful to highlight important problem areas and bring in additional context. But they are not a replacement.

Author: I wonder if it's better to play in more to my engineering side and so it it coming from a peer rather than a PM telling engineers to do more interviews? Could have it a bit more stealthy. Whatever you think will land best?

- Is this actually a problem for you?

**Recommendation:** Read "The Mom Test" by Rob Fitzpatrick. It's a fantastic primer on problem exploration.

### 2. Solution validation

You’ve identified the hair-on-fire problem and understand it well. Now you’re validating whether your solution actually solves it. Focus on presenting the user with quick prototypes.

Example activities:
 - Have the user click through a Figma prototype and think out-loud. Ask them to complete the high-level goal and see where they get stuck. Ask what they think the text means.

- Send a few mockups of the solutions over Slack to the user from the problem exploration interview and ask if it solves the problem.

- Create a mock-up and have a call with the user to see if they will commit to paying some amount if you build it.

**Recommendation:** The book "Don’t make me think" is great for usability testing.

## Build a quick feedback loop by combining sync and async communication

User interviews are high-bandwidth: you can quickly narrow down the most important problem and gather all the parameters. But it normally takes a few days to get on the call.

> After the initial discussion, get your user on Slack for B2B or Whatsapp for B2B. This will enable you to quickly follow up with mockups or further questions during the solution validation phase.

Reviewer: I fear WhatsApp is a bit EU-centric. Does anyone in the US really use it?

---
date: 2023-02-27
title: "10x engineers talk to users"
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
  - luke-harries
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
  - Guides
  - Product engineers
---

> Most people think becoming a 10x engineer means improving their typing speed, buying more monitors, or using the latest framework where everything is a macro. These hacks might improve efficiency somewhat, but you'll get a 1.5x boost at most.
> 
> So, where does the next 8.5x come from? By zooming out and solving for user impact. You, as an engineer, need to deeply understand (and care) about your users. In doing so, you'll generate true leverage by choosing the right problem, building the right solution, and solving their "hair-on-fire" problems. 
> 
> The best way to do this? Speak directly to users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We believe the best way to become a 10x engineer is to zoom out and solve for user impact. Engineers and founders need to deeply understand (and care) about users. In doing so, you generate true leverage by choosing the right problem, building the right solution, and solving their "hair-on-fire" problems. 

The best way to do this? Speak directly to users.
```

Reviewer: New shorter intro suggestion. Definitely think this works better.

## Solving the information bottleneck

In traditional tech companies, information flows from the user to the product manager (PM) by an interview, and then from the PM to the engineer through a bunch of tickets:

![PM to engineer](../images/blog/10x-engineers-do-user-interviews/pm-to-engineer.png)

At each stage, important context is lost. Information flows one way, so you can’t go deeper on the important areas, and engineers lose agency in what they're building and why. In such an environment, speed is the only logical optimization for an engineer.

Here's what it looks like when engineers talk directly to users:

![Direct user-Engineer Interaction](../images/blog/10x-engineers-do-user-interviews/direct-interaction.png)

Information moves quickly and in both directions, boosting the signal. By increasing the signal you can quickly cut scope, realize you’re tackling the wrong problem, or come up with a more elegant solution – something engineers can do most effectively because they have the background on the existing architecture and components. 

> Companies still need product managers (I'm the Head of Product at PostHog after all 😅), but we ship faster and better because our [product engineers](/blog/what-is-a-product-engineer) speak directly to users. And, because our product managers aren't spending all their time on tickets, they have time to surface new opportunities or build out [our bigger vision](/blog/helping-engineers-to-product).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Companies still need product managers, but it's easier to ship faster and better work when engineers behave like [product engineers](/blog/what-is-a-product-engineer) and talk to users. In doing so, product managers freed from writing tickets to spend more time exploring bigger opportunities.
```

Just tweaking the language here per @charlescook-ph's feedback.

> > 💬 **Sidenote:** PostHog's session recording feature came about because Karl, one our engineers, took the time to talk to a user and realized the best solution was integrating recordings with our existing product analytics tool. One hackathon later, we had a prototype. Session recording is now a core part of our product and was a key driver in our strategy shift from a pure, self-hosted product analytics tool to an all-in-one product OS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 💬 **Sidenote:** PostHog's session recording feature came about because Karl, one of our engineers, took the time to talk to a user and realized the best solution was integrating recordings with our existing product analytics tool. One hackathon later, we had a prototype. Session recording is now a core part of our product and was a key driver in our strategy shift from a pure, self-hosted product analytics tool to an all-in-one product OS.
```

## How to talk to users (as an engineer)

Automation is crucial here. Too much friction and you’ll ride an initial burst of motivation followed by regression to the old way of heads-down coding.

Step one is to find users to talk to. You can define your segment using company traits, user traits, and behavioral information. A data warehouse or analytics platform like PostHog can be helpful here.

Next, it's time to bulk email your segment. The simplest way is to email out a Calendly link in batches via bcc’ed using a message like this:

```jsx
Hi! I’m {YOUR NAME}, a software engineer at {YOUR COMPANY}. I’m currently working on {FEATURE / PROBLEM} and would love your input on it. Free for a quick call at any of these times? {INSERT CALENDLY LINK} 
```

> This is a good start, but you should move to an in-app prompt as soon as you can – we built PostHog's [user interview app](https://posthog.com/tutorials/feedback-interviews-site-apps#setting-up-the-user-interview-app) (picture below) just for this.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a good start, but you should move to an in-app prompt as soon as you can to save time and increase conversion – we built PostHog's [user interview app](https://posthog.com/tutorials/feedback-interviews-site-apps#setting-up-the-user-interview-app) (picture below) just for this.  
```

![User interview app](../images/blog/10x-engineers-do-user-interviews/user-interview-app.png)

> We’ve seen an increase in conversion from outreach to booking by ~5x (from 3% to 16%) since we started using in-app prompts, a reduction in email spam, and better organization by doing so. A reward like a $30 merchandise voucher helps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We’ve seen an increase in conversion from outreach to booking by ~5x (from 3% to 16%) since we started using in-app prompts, a reduction in email spam, and better organization by doing so. A reward like a $30 merch voucher helps.
```

## The two basic types of user interview

Effective user interviews need a goal, and they typically fall into one of two buckets: 

### 1. Problem exploration

Find the biggest hair-on-fire problem and then deeply understand the parameters. Focus on the concrete times they’ve experienced the problem.

Example questions:
- How have they tried to solve it before?
- What do they think of the other solutions on the market?
- Would they pay for it?
- Can you talk me through the last time you experienced this problem?
- Is this actually a problem for you?

> **Recommendation:** Read "The Mom Test" by Rob Fitzpatrick. It's a fantastic primer on problem exploration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### 2. Solution validation

You’ve identified the hair-on-fire problem and understand it well. Now you’re validating whether your solution actually solves it. Focus on presenting the user with quick prototypes.

Example activities:
 - Have the user click through a Figma prototype and think out-loud. Ask them to complete the high-level goal and see where they get stuck. Ask what they think the text means.

- Send a few mockups of the solutions over Slack to the user from the problem exploration interview and ask if it solves the problem.

- Create a mock-up and have a call with the user to see if they will commit to paying some amount if you build it.

> **Recommendation:** The book "Don’t make me think" is great for usability testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

So, where does the next 8.5x come from? By zooming out and solving for user impact. You, as an engineer, need to deeply understand (and care) about your users. In doing so, you'll generate true leverage by choosing the right problem, building the right solution, and solving their "hair-on-fire" problems. The best way to do this? Speak directly to them.

## Tickets are highly lossy

Your users are real people. They have problems to overcome. They work in a team. They have hopes and dreams. But if the only information that you get is the ticket "Add a button to this page" you miss all that context. And you miss the opportunity to build a significantly better product.

Let's discuss an example from PostHog: we were getting requests for setting currency symbols on charts. We could have added the most common currency symbols to the chart and called it done.

But we decided to dig deeper and speak to our users. Why did they want currency symbols on their charts in PostHog? What was the problem?

> We learned that if a teammate created the chart it was often unclear what the axes of charts referred. This affected charts containing revenue but also other types of data such as app response times measured in milliseconds. We reframed the problem to support custom prefixes and postfixes and built it within a day. And compared to the original problem definition we solved the long-tail of use cases that we'd otherwise have to add incrementally.

Author: I don't feel this example is particularly strong - what do you think @andyvan-ph? Quite a minor product. I can try and find a better on

Another example we could do is the origin of session recording as a way to better answer what exact users are doing?

Author: I've added a much better example

---
date: 2023-02-19
title: Becoming a 10x engineer - why user interviews are key
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author:
  - luke-harries
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
  - Guides
  - Product engineers
---

> Most people think becoming a 10x engineer means improving their typing speed, buying more monitors, or using the latest framework where everything is a macro. These hacks might speed up the time from an idea to a rolled-out implementation, but you'll get a 1.5x boost at most.

Reviewer 2: lol, I love this

> Most people think becoming a 10x engineer means improving their typing speed, buying more monitors, or using the latest framework where everything is a macro. These hacks might speed up the time from an idea to a rolled-out implementation, but you'll get a 1.5x boost at most.

Author: It's definitely a bit more theoretical. I quite like it and reminds me of Neil's blog posts (although I'm bias as I wrote it lol). But if we want a shorter and more practical tone we can cut it down
